## Background

Ecology needs data-intensive approaches to predict the responses of biodiversity
and ecosystem function to global change, address invasive species, and
prioritize areas for conservation. However, the discipline has failed to embrace
these approaches, with repeated recent editorials by members of the National
Academy of Sciences criticizing their use. Ecology needs leaders in data science
to break down these barriers, make meaningful predictions about ecological
systems, and train the next generation of data focused ecologists.

Ecological data is highly heterogeneous and many or the core data types have not
experienced the drastic declines in data collection costs of other fields and,
where it has, the historical data that is so crucial to understanding global
change cannot be recollected. In addition, the field lacks researchers with the
necessary training to deal with the volume and velocity of data that is now
being collected using sensor networks, satellite collars, and remote
sensing. Therefore data-intensive ecology faces three major challenges: 1)
mining, assembling, and modeling the large amounts of existing complex and
heterogeneous data; 2) integrating these data with the high volume and velocity
data from emerging approaches to automated data collection; and 3) training
ecologists in the tools and approaches necessary for data-intensive science.

## Major Accomplishments

I entered graduate school with a traditional field ecology background, but
quickly became frustrated with the limited scope of inference that could be
accomplished using typical ecological approaches. It was possible to understand
a single system well using observational and experimental approaches, but these
results could not be generalize across the globe and across the diversity of
life. I joined one of the only labs in the world doing data-intensive ecology
and have spent my career using large data compilations to understand ecological
systems at continental to global scales, developing tools to make it faster and
easier to conduct this type of research, and training the next generation of
data-intensive ecologists.

**Research:** My research uses large compilations of ecological data to
understand the processes driving ecosystems, test ecological models to determine
if they are general or operate differently across different ecosystems and
taxonomic groups, and make ecological predictions. We have developed novel
approaches to understanding patterns of biodiversity based on dividing species
into resident and transient species based on the structure of their population
time-series and models these groups separately to yield improved predictions for
biodiversity (Hurlbert & White 2005, White & Hurlbert 2010, Coyle et
al. 2013). We have lead the way in strong general tests of ecological theory by
creating the largest combined datasets ever used in community ecology and using
them to evaluate and compare ecological theories (White et al. 2006, Thibault et
al. 2011, White et al. 2012, Locey & White 2013, McGlinn et al. 2013, Xiao et
al. 2013). Finally, we have built on these ecological theories by using them to
make predictions for biodiversity, rarity, and patterns related to ecosystem
level fluxes (White et al. 2012, Xiao et al. 2013). We are now combining these
approaches with remotely sensed data and machine learning in a multi-level
modeling framework to forecast the future state of ecological systems and make
predictions for unsurveyed locations (McGlinn et al. in prep).

**Software Development:** Conducting this type of research requires the
time-consuming assembly and associations of numerous heterogeneous
datasets. Typically every scientist working on these datasets writes custom code
to handle the data or worse assembles them manually. This results in a
substantial waste of time and effort on data munging instead of science. My
group built the EcoData Retriever to address this problem. This extensible
software framework automates the tasks of discovering, downloading, cleaning and
reformatting ecological data files and stores them in relational databases or as
flat text files. This simplifies the process of finding, acquiring, and using
ecological data making it easier to use the diversity of ecological datasets in
combined analyses. Altmetrics by Impact Story show that the Retriever is both
highly recommended and highly cited, AltMetric.com shows that the associated
paper is in the 97th percentile of impact for scientific papers, and data from
the Python Package Index suggests ~100 downloads per month.

**Training & Mentoring:** I have been active in training and mentoring the next
generation of data-intensive ecologists and biologists more generally. As part
of my current NSF CAREER Award I have developed a suite of university courses
that teach core aspects of data science (programming, databases, statistics,
visualization) focused on addressing biological problems
([http://compb.io](http://compb.io)). Students and postdoctoral researchers in
my lab with backgrounds from field biology to mathematics to statistics receive
in-depth training in data science. To help train students beyond my university I
am actively involved in [Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org):
developing material, teaching ecology focused workshops (6 in the last 2 years),
and serving on the advisory board. Finally, I have taken a leadership role in
moving biology towards more open, reproducible, and data-intensive approaches
by: 1) leading by example through openly sharing
[reproducible code](https://github.com/weecology),
[data](http://esapubs.org/archive/ecol/E092/201/default.htm), and
[grant proposals](http://figshare.com/authors/Ethan%20P.%20White/97015): 2)
writing papers on
[data management and sharing](http://doi.org/10.4033/iee.2013.6b.6.f),
[best practices in computational science](http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001745),
and
[the need for preprints in biology](http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001563)
(all written in the open); and 3) through explaining the importance of these
approaches on my [blog](http://jabberwockyecology.org)) and through my active
presence on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/ethanwhite).

