## Background

Ecology needs data-intensive approaches to predict the responses of biodiversity
and ecosystem function to global change, address invasive species, and
prioritize areas for conservation. The common data science challenges are all
prevalent in ecology. There are large quantities of highly heterogeneous data
(including historical data related to global change that cannot be recollected)
and the field lacks researchers with the necessary training to deal with the
increasing volume and velocity of data that is now being collected using sensor
networks, satellite collars, and remote sensing. However, the discipline has
failed to embrace data-intensive approaches, with repeated recent editorials by
members of the National Academy of Sciences criticizing their use. Ecology needs
leaders in data science to: 1) break down these barriers; 2) mine, assemble, and
model existing data; 3) integrating these data with the large amounts of data
being generated by emerging approaches to automated data collection and citizen
science; and 4) train ecologists in the tools and approaches necessary for
data-intensive science.


## Major Accomplishments

I entered graduate school with a field ecology background, but became frustrated
with the scope of inference that could be accomplished using typical ecological
approaches. It was possible to understand a single system well, but these
results could not be generalized across the globe and across the diversity of
life. I joined one of the only labs doing data-intensive ecology and have spent
my career using large data compilations to understand ecological systems at
continental to global scales, developing tools to make it faster and easier to
conduct this type of research, and training the next generation of
data-intensive ecologists.

**Research:** My research uses large data compilations to understand the
processes driving ecosystems, test ecological models, and make predictions
regarding ecological systems. We have developed novel approaches to
understanding patterns of biodiversity based on dividing species into resident
and transient species using the structure of their population time-series
(Hurlbert & White 2005, White & Hurlbert 2010, Coyle et al. 2013). We have lead
the way in strong general tests of ecological theory by creating the largest
combined datasets ever used in community ecology and using them to evaluate and
compare ecological theories (White et al. 2006, Thibault et al. 2011, White et
al. 2012, Locey & White 2013, McGlinn et al. 2013, Xiao et al. 2013). Finally,
we have built on these ecological theories by using them to make predictions for
biodiversity, rarity, and patterns related to ecosystem level fluxes (White et
al. 2012, Xiao et al. 2013). We are beginning to combine this with new work
using machine learning and remotely sensed data in multi-level models to
forecast the future state of ecological systems and make predictions for
unsurveyed locations.

**Software Development:** Conducting this type of research requires the
time-consuming assembly of numerous heterogeneous datasets. Typically every
scientist writes custom code to handle the data or assembles them by hand. This
wastes time and effort on data munging instead of science. My group built the
[EcoData Retriever](http://ecodataretriever.org) to address this problem. It
automates the discovery, downloading, cleaning, and reformatting of ecological
data. This simplifies the process of finding, acquiring, and using data and
therefore increases the use of the diversity of ecological datasets. Altmetrics
show that the Retriever is both
[highly recommended and highly cited](http://impactstory.org/ethanwhite/product/37058b0ebf0a11e1bdf912313d1a5e63)
(stars and forks on GitHub in the 91-99%tile), the associated paper is in the
[97th percentile of impact for scientific papers](http://www.altmetric.com/details.php?citation_id=1555657),
and the installers were downloaded over 225 times in the last 10 days.

**Training & Mentoring:** I actively train and mentor the next generation of
data-intensive biologists. Using an NSF CAREER Award I have developed a
[suite of university courses](http://compb.io) that teach core aspects of data
science to biologists (programming, databases, statistics,
visualization). Course material is available online and has been viewed over
125,000 times by users in over 150 countries. Students and postdocs in my lab
with backgrounds including field biology, mathematics, statistics, and computer
science receive in-depth training in data-intensive approaches to ecology. I am
also actively involved in [Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org):
developing material, teaching ecology focused workshops (6 in the last 2 years),
and serving on the advisory board. Finally, I have taken a leadership role in
making biology more open, reproducible, and data-intensive approaches by: 1)
openly sharing [reproducible code](https://github.com/weecology),
[data](http://esapubs.org/archive/ecol/E092/201/default.htm), and
[grant proposals](http://figshare.com/authors/Ethan%20P.%20White/97015); 2)
writing papers on
[data management and sharing](http://doi.org/10.4033/iee.2013.6b.6.f),
[best practices in computational science](http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001745),
and
[the need for preprints in biology](http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001563)
(all written in the open); and 3) explaining the importance of these approaches
on my [blog](http://jabberwockyecology.org)) and through my active presence on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/ethanwhite).


## Future Research directions

**Research:** Over the next 5 years I will focus on data driven modeling of
ecological systems. Most modeling in ecology emphasizes process over prediction,
taking processes that biologists believe to be important and determining how
ecological systems should behave if those processes are operating. While much of
the justification for these models comes from the need to make predictions about
global change, they typically are often only weakly informed by empirical data,
are not tested using predictions for independent data, and are viewed as being
highly system specific. To improve our ability develop and evaluate models in
quantitative ways I will build on my current efforts to tie data and theory
together more tightly by expanding the use data-centric approaches to model
development (e.g., machine learning, hierarchical modeling) and by leveraging
existing data to test, improve, and inform existing models.

My group has been working extensively with entropy maximization models, which
model the expected state of a system based on a set empirical constraints. We
will build on this foundation by expanding more generally into machine learning
and hierarchical modeling to make predictions for most ecological patterns and
processes across scales. We will do this by developing a suite of master models
whose predictions can be aggregated to answer most questions about biodiversity
(by aggregating the predictions across many species), conservation of individual
species or groups of species (by being able to make predictions for how their
populations will change), and ecosystem services including biosphere influences
on carbon fluxes and global change. For example, we will develop models for the
number of individuals of each species across space, the traits of those
individuals, the dynamics of both counts and traits over time. These models will
take as input large compilations of climate, land use, and ecological data,
including data on the abundances of other species and their potential
interactions (e.g., birds compete with other birds for food and require certain
kinds of plants for food and nesting). These models will be trained and tested
using compilations of ecological data from across ecosystems and taxonomic groups,
including an expanded version of our current compilation which includes data on
the distribution of ~50 million individual organisms and growing compilations of
individual level trait data (~2.5 million trait values).

In addition to these data-centric modeling efforts will we use the large amounts
of existing ecological data to test process based models. We will conduct strong
tests and comparisons of ecological models by evaluating their performance
across ecosystems and taxonomic groups, by testing their ability to make
predictions for independent data, by evaluating all of their predictions
simultaneously (a practice rarely undertaken in ecology), and directly comparing
the predictions of models that make predictions for the same patterns. The
information from these comparisons will be used to identify the most promising
models for making broad scale ecological predictions, to identify aspects of
these models that require improvement, and to change or constrain these models
to yield improved predictions for ecological systems.

**Software Development:** We will continue to build on our efforts to make
data-intensive ecology easier, more robust, and more reproducible. We plan to
add provenance tracking and automated reproducibilty features to the EcoData
Retriever that will allow data munging steps to be documented and easily
reproduced. We will develop tools to it easier to combine ecological, environmental,
taxonomic, and other datasets in reproducible ways to allow ecologists to
quickly make use of the broad array of data that relates to ecological systems.

**Training & Mentoring:** I and my lab will continue build on our training and
mentoring efforts to bring ecology into the data science era.
